agre paśyāmi tejo nibiḍatarakalāyāvalīlobhanīyaṃ
pīyūṣāplāvito'haṃ tadanu tadudare divyakaiśoraveṣam |
tāruṇyārambharamyaṃ paramasukharasāsvādaromāñcitāṅgai-
rāvītaṃ nāradādyairvilasadupaniṣatsundarīmaṇḍalaiśca ||1||
agre paśyāmi teja:	in front (of me) I see a radiance
nibiḍatara-kalāya-	(like that of) very thick Kalaaya (blue lily)
avalī-lobhanīyaṃ	array, charming
pīyūṣa-āplāvita:-ahaṃ	in the nectar bathed am I
tat-anu tat-udare	then in its centre (of the radiance)
divya-kaiśora-veṣam	in a divine young form of a body
tāruṇya-ārambha-ramyaṃ	the onset of youth enchanting
parama-sukha-rasa-āsvāda-	supreme bliss nectar experiencing
romāñcita-aṅgai:-	by enthralled bodied
āvītaṃ nārada-ādyai:-	surrounded by Naarada etc.,
vilasat-upaniṣat-	resplendent Upanishads
sundarī-maṇḍalai:-ca	and as a group of beautiful women
In front of me I see a bluish radiance excelling a very thick array of Kalaaya (blue lily) flowers. I am bathed in the nectar of the sight. Then, in the centre of the radiance I see the form of a divine young body enchanting by the budding of youth. He is surrounded by sages like Naarada thrilled with ecstatic bliss, and by a group of beautiful women who are the Upanishads embodied.
nīlābhaṃ kuñcitāgraṃ ghanamamalataraṃ saṃyataṃ cārubhaṅgyā
ratnottaṃsābhirāmaṃ valayitamudayaccandrakai: piñchajālai: |
mandārasraṅnivītaṃ tava pṛthukabarībhāramālokaye'haṃ
snigdhaśvetordhvapuṇḍrāmapi ca sulalitāṃ phālabālenduvīthīm ||2||
nīlābhaṃ kuñcitāgraṃ	dark and curly in front
ghanam-amalataraṃ	thick and very clean
saṃyataṃ cāru-bhaṅgyā	held together in a beautiful manner
ratna-uttaṃsa-abhirāmaṃ	bejewelled very beautifully
valayitam-udayat-candrakai:	encircled by glistening eyed
piñchajālai:	peacock feather plumes
mandāra-srak-nivītaṃ	mandaar flower garland tied with
tava pṛthu-kabarī-bhāram-	Thy luxuriant locks of hair
ālokaye-ahaṃ	see I
snigdha-śveta-ūrdhva-	and soft white upright
puṇḍrām-api ca	sandal paste mark also
sulalitāṃ phāla-	(on a) smooth forehead (like a)
bāla-indu-vīthīm	young moon's line
hṛdyaṃ pūrṇānukampārṇavamṛdulaharīcañcalabhrūvilāsai-
rānīlasnigdhapakṣmāvaliparilasitaṃ netrayugmaṃ vibho te |
sāndracchāyaṃ viśālāruṇakamaladalākāramāmugdhatāraṃ
kāruṇyālokalīlāśiśiritabhuvanaṃ kṣipyatāṃ mayyanāthe ||3||
hṛdyaṃ pūrṇa-anukampā-	attractive, full of compassion's
arṇava-mṛdu-laharī-	oceans' gentle waves
cañcala-bhrū-vilāsai:-	playful eyebrows tremulous play
ānīla-snigdha-pakṣma-	bluish glistening eyelashes
āvali-parilasitaṃ	rows beautifying
netra-yugmaṃ vibho te	the two eyes of Thee O Lord!
sāndra-cchāyaṃ	very lustrous
viśāla-aruṇa-	big red
kamala-dala-ākāram-	lotus petal shaped
āmugdha-tāraṃ	very beautiful pupils
kāruṇya-āloka-līlā-	merciful glances casting
śiśirita-bhuvanaṃ	cooling the worlds
kṣipyatāṃ mayi-anāthe	do cast on me, the forsaken
O All pervading Lord! Do cast on me, the forsaken one, the glances of Thy pair of eyes which are attractive with brows that are tremulous like gentle waves in the ocean of compassion. Thy eyes which are very lustrous and have rows of beautiful bluish eyelashes. They are shaped like big red lotus petals and have very beautiful pupils. Thy glances cool the worlds.
uttuṅgollāsināsaṃ harimaṇimukuraprollasadgaṇḍapālī-
vyālolatkarṇapāśāñcitamakaramaṇīkuṇḍaladvandvadīpram |
unmīladdantapaṅktisphuradaruṇataracchāyabimbādharānta:-
prītiprasyandimandasmitamadhurataraṃ vaktramudbhāsatāṃ me ||4||
uttuṅga-ullāsi-nāsaṃ	high prominent beautiful nose
hari-maṇi-mukura-	emerald mirror
prollasat-gaṇḍa-pālī-	reflecting cheek area
vyālolat-karṇa-pāśa-	dangling near the ears
añcita-makara-maṇī-	marked with fish and studded with gems
kuṇḍala-dvandva-dīpram	earring's pair resplendent
unmīlat-danta-paṅkti-	revealing the rows of teeth
sphurat-aruṇatara-cchāya-	quivering ruby red
bimba-adharānta:-	like bimba fruit, between the lips
prīti-prasyandi-	with love flowing
manda-smita-madhura-taraṃ	gentle smile very sweet
vaktraṃ-udbhāsatāṃ me	Thy face, may be clear and shines unto me
Thy face is beautiful with a prominent and well shaped nose, Thy cheek area, like an emerald mirror reflects the pair of fish shaped gem studded earrings dangling from the ears, are resplendent. Thy quivering ruby red lips like the bimba fruit, slightly parted reveal Thy beautiful row of teeth, and the very sweet gentle smile over flows with love. O Lord! may that Thy face clearly shine unto me.
bāhudvandvena ratnojjvalavalayabhṛtā śoṇapāṇipravāle-
nopāttāṃ veṇunālī prasṛtanakhamayūkhāṅgulīsaṅgaśārām |
kṛtvā vaktrāravinde sumadhuravikasadrāgamudbhāvyamānai:
śabdabrahmāmṛtaistvaṃ śiśiritabhuvanai: siñca me karṇavīthīm ||5||
bāhu-dvandvena	by two hands
ratna-ujjvala-valaya-bhṛtā	studded shining bangles wearing
śoṇa-pāṇi-pravālena-	red hands like corals
upāttāṃ veṇunālī	holding the flute
prasṛta-nakha-mayūkha-	spreading from the nails the rays
aṅgulī-saṅga-śārām	by Thy fingers' contact made multi colored
kṛtvā vaktra-aravinde	applied to Thy face lotus
sumadhura-vikasat-	sweet producing
rāgam-udbhāvyamānai:	melodies flowing
śabda-brahma-amṛtai:-	sound as Brahman nectar
tvaṃ śiśirita-bhuvanai:	Thou cooling the worlds
siñca me karṇa-vīthīm	soak my ear passages
Deign to soak my ear passages, with the extremely sweet melodies which cool all the worlds and which are Brahman Itself in the form of sound, which flows out of Thy flute which is placed on Thy lotus mouth. The flute is multi colored by the contact with the finger nails' rays spreading out, the two hands wearing studded shining bangles and red as coral, holding it.
utsarpatkaustubhaśrītatibhiraruṇitaṃ komalaṃ kaṇṭhadeśaṃ
vakṣa: śrīvatsaramyaṃ taralatarasamuddīprahārapratānam |
nānāvarṇaprasūnāvalikisalayinīṃ vanyamālāṃ vilola-
llolambāṃ lambamānāmurasi tava tathā bhāvaye ratnamālām ||6||
utsarpat-kaustubha-	emitting (from the) Kaustubha
śrī-tatibhi:-aruṇitaṃ	lustrous ray collection (by which) rendered red
komalaṃ kaṇṭha-deśaṃ	delicate neck area
vakṣa: śrīvatsa-ramyaṃ	chest with Shreevatsa mark beautified
taralatara-samuddīpra-	tremulous and brilliant
hāra-pratānaṃ	necklaces many
nānā-varṇa-prasūna-	various colored flowers
avali-kisalayinīṃ	rows and tender sprouts
vanyamālāṃ vilolat-	wild flower garlands hovering
lolambāṃ lambamānām-	( on which) bees, hanging
urasi tava tathā	on Thy chest, thus
bhāvaye ratnamālām	I meditate, on the gem necklaces
I meditate on Thy handsome neck rendered red by the lustrous rays emitting from the Kaustubh jewel, Thy chest beautified with the Shreevatsa mark, tremulous and brilliant many pearl and gem necklaces and garlands made from rows of wild multi colored flowers, with bees hovering on them, spread on Thy chest.
aṅge pañcāṅgarāgairatiśayavikasatsaurabhākṛṣṭalokaṃ
līnānekatrilokīvitatimapi kṛśāṃ bibhrataṃ madhyavallīm |
śakrāśmanyastataptojjvalakanakanibhaṃ pītacelaṃ dadhānaṃ
dhyāyāmo dīptaraśmisphuṭamaṇiraśanākiṅkiṇīmaṇḍitaṃ tvāṃ ||7||
aṅge pañca-aṅga-rāgai:-	on Thy body, of five ingredients, the uguent
atiśaya-vikasat-saurabha-	very much spreading fragrance
ākṛṣṭa-lokaṃ	(and so) attracting the whole world
līna-aneka-trilokī	holding the whole of the three worlds
vitatim-api kṛśāṃ	as a group, even then, slender
bibhrataṃ madhyavallīm	having midriff (waist), like a creeper
śakra-aśma-nyasta-	on a sapphire rock placed
tapta-ujjvala-kanaka-nibhaṃ	molten, shining gold like
pīta-celaṃ dadhānaṃ dhyāyāma:	yellow cloth wearing, we meditate on
dīpta-raśmi-sphuṭa-	brilliant rays emitting
maṇi-raśanā-	gem studded girdle (with)
kiṅkiṇī-maṇḍitaṃ tvām	mini bells (adorned) Thee
We meditate on Thee, the unguents of five ingredients smeared on whose body attracts the whole world by the spreading of its fragrance. We meditate on Thee whose midriff waist is slender and creeper like, even though it holds all the three worlds within. We meditate on Thee whose body is like a rock of sapphire, and is adorned by a yellow silk cloth which is shining like molten gold and wearing a girdle made of studded gems and with minibells on it, emitting brilliant rays.
ūrū cārū tavorū ghanamasṛṇarucau cittacorau ramāyā:
viśvakṣobhaṃ viśaṅkya dhruvamaniśamubhau pītacelāvṛtāṅgau |
ānamrāṇāṃ purastānnyasanadhṛtasamastārthapālīsamudga-
cchāyaṃ jānudvayaṃ ca kramapṛthulamanojñe ca jaṅghe niṣeve ||8||
ūrū cārū tava-ūrū	stout handsome Thy thighs
ghana-masṛṇa-rucau	solid and soft and charming
citta-corau ramāyā:	stealing Ramaa's heart
viśva-kṣobhaṃ viśaṅkya	the whole world excitement, fearing
dhruvam-aniśam-ubhau	certainly, always them both
pīta-cela-āvṛta-aṅgau	(with) yellow cloth covering both parts
ānamrāṇāṃ purastāt-	in front of the devotees
nyasana-dhṛta-samasta-	putting and holding all
artha-pālī-samudgat-	the collection of desired objects, a casket
chāyaṃ jānu-dvayaṃ ca	like, and two knees
krama-pṛthula manojñe	tapering and beautiful
ca jaṅghe niṣeve	forelegs, I meditate on
I meditate on Thy two handsome thighs, which are solid soft and charming, stealing Ramaa's heart. Fearing to excite the whole world, definitely, they are always covered with yellow silk cloth. Thy two knees, are like two caskets holding all the desired objects for Thy devotees, and Thy two forelegs are beautifully tapered and fleshy.
mañjīraṃ mañjunādairiva padabhajanaṃ śreya ityālapantaṃ
pādāgraṃ bhrāntimajjatpraṇatajanamanomandaroddhārakūrmam |
uttuṅgātāmrarājannakharahimakarajyotsnayā cā'śritānāṃ
santāpadhvāntahantrīṃ tatimanukalaye maṅgalāmaṅgulīnām ||9||
mañjīraṃ mañju-nādai:-iva	the anklets, by their sweet sound, as if
pada-bhajanaṃ śreya	(Thy) feet worship is excellent
iti-ālapantaṃ	thus saying
pāda-agraṃ bhrānti-majjat-	the forefeet, at the time of deluge, sinking
praṇata-jana-mana:-	prostrating peoples' minds
mandara-uddhāra-kūrmam	the Mandaar mountain lifting up tortoise
uttuṅga-ātāmra-rājat-	raised, very red and shining
nakhara-himakara-jyotsnayā	toe nails' moon light
ca-āśritānāṃ	and of the devotees
santāpa-dhvānta-hantrīṃ	sorrowful darkness expelling
tatim-anukalaye	rows (of toe nails) I meditate on
maṅgalām-aṅgulīnām	(of the) auspicious toes
I meditate on Thy anklets with their sweet sound, which, as it were, sweetly confirm the excellence of worshipping at Thy feet. Thy incarnation of the tortoise which lifted up the Mandaar mountain at the time of the deluge, Thy forefeet lift up the minds of the people who prostrate at Thy feet. Thy toe nails, of Thy auspicious toes, slightly raised, very red and shining are like the moon light expelling the darkness of the sorrows of Thy devotees. I meditate on them.
yogīndrāṇāṃ tvadaṅgeṣvadhikasumadhuraṃ muktibhājāṃ nivāso
bhaktānāṃ kāmavarṣadyutarukisalayaṃ nātha te pādamūlam |
nityaṃ cittasthitaṃ me pavanapurapate kṛṣṇa kāruṇyasindho
hṛtvā niśśeṣatāpān pradiśatu paramānandasandohalakṣmīm ||10||
yogīndrāṇāṃ	for the great yogis
tvat-aṅgeṣu-	among Thy body parts
adhika-sumadhuraṃ	most beloved
muktibhājāṃ nivāsa:	for the liberated ones, (they) are the residence
bhaktānāṃ kāma-varṣa-	for the devotees, the desires pouring
dyu-taru-kisalayaṃ	heavenly tree's sprouts
nātha te pādamūlam	are, O Lord! Soles of Thy feet
nityaṃ citta-sthitaṃ me	may they always rest in my mind
pavanapurapate kṛṣṇa	O Lord of Guruvaayur! O Krishna!
karuṇāsindho	O Ocean of Compassion!
hṛtvā niśśeṣa-tāpān	destroying all my sufferings
pradiśatu parama-ānanda-	confer (on me) Supreme Bliss
sandoha-lakṣamīm	in a flow of fullness (abundance)
O Lord! Among the parts of Thy body, the soles of Thy feet are the most beloved and coveted to the great yogis. The liberated ones reside there. They pour all the desires of their devotees, and are like the sprouts of the celestial tree. O Lord of Guruvaayur! O Lord Krishna! may those feet always rest in my heart. O Ocean of Compassion! destroy all my sorrows and confer a full abundant flow of Supreme Bliss.
ajñātvā te mahatvaṃ yadiha nigaditaṃ viśvanātha kṣamethā:
stotraṃ caitatsahasrottaramadhikataraṃ tvatprasādāya bhūyāt |
dvedhā nārāyaṇīyaṃ śrutiṣu ca januṣā stutyatāvarṇanena
sphītaṃ līlāvatārairidamiha kurutāmāyurārogyasaukhyam ||11||
ajñātvā te mahatvaṃ	not knowing Thy greatness
yat-iha nigaditaṃ	what ever here is said
viśvanātha kṣamethā:	O Lord of the Universe! Pardon me
stotram ca-etat-	and this hymn
sahasra-uttaram-adhikataraṃ	of a thousand and more (verses)
tvat-prasādāya bhūyāt	for Thy grace be (a source)
dvedhā nārāyaṇīyaṃ	in two ways it is Naaraayaneeyam
śrutiṣu ca januṣā	and in the Vedas Thy incarnations
stutyatā-varṇanena	sung about and described
sphītaṃ līlā-avatārai:-	it is full of Thy sportive incarnations
idam-iha kurutām-	this here may confer
āyu:-ārogya-saukhyam	long life, good health and happiness
O Lord of the Universe! Deign to pardon me for what I have said here, not knowing fully Thy greatness. This hymn consists of more than a thousand verses. May it be the source of Thy abounding grace. It is in two ways Naaraayaneeyam. May this hymn which describes in accordance with the Vedas, Thy creative actions and Thy sportive incarnations, confer long life, good health and happiness.